It was a dark and stormy night. Erwin huddled under his covers as he had done numerous times that
summer. As the wind and rain lashed at the window, he feared having to retreat to the storm cellar
once again. The residents of Erwin’s apartment building sought shelter whenever there were threats of
tornadoes in the area. While it was safe down there, Erwin feared the ridicule he would face once again
from the other school boys. In the rush to the cellar, Erwin seemed to always end up with a random
pair of socks, and the other boys teased him about it mercilessly.
Not that Erwin hadn’t tried hard to solve this problem. He had a very simple collection of
socks—black or white, for either school or play; short or long, for either trousers or lederhosen.
After the first few teasing episodes from the other boys, Erwin had sorted his socks into two separate
drawers. He placed all the black socks in one drawer and all the white socks in another drawer.
Erwin figured he could determine an individual sock’s length in the dark of night simply by feeling
it, but he had to have them presorted into white and black because the apartment generally lost
power before the call to the shelter.
Unfortunately, Erwin found that this presorting of the socks by color was ineffective. Whenever
he reached into the white sock drawer and chose two long socks, or two short socks, there was a 50%
probability of any one sock being black or white. The results from the black sock drawer were the
same. The socks seemed to have “forgotten” the color that Erwin had determined previously.
Erwin also tried sorting the socks into two drawers based upon their length, without regard to
color. When he chose black or white socks from these long and short drawers, the socks had also “forgotten”
whether they were long or short.
After these fruitless attempts to solve his problem through experiments, Erwin decided to save
himself the fashion embarrassment, and he replaced his sock collection with a set of medium length
brown socks. However, he continued to ponder the mysteries of the socks throughout his childhood.
After many years of daydreaming about the mystery socks, Erwin Schrodinger proposed his theory
of “Quantum Socks” and become famous. And that is the beginning of the story of the quantum
socks.